The International Day of Peace at the United Nations
On International Peace Day, the United Nations asks for a 24-hour ceasefire of all hostilities around the world. It also asks people to observe one minute of silence at noon to honour victims of war and violence. The day begins with the Peace Bell Ceremony at the United Nations headquarters. The Peace Bell was donated by the United Nations Association of Japan in June 1954 and is made of metal that includes coins contributed by people from 65 member countries. The bell is a symbol of hope for peace and is rung several times a year, including on International Peace Day. After the bell has been rung, the UN Secretary-General delivers a message.
The purpose of the International Day of Peace
The International Day of Peace is for 'commemorating and strengthening the ideals of peace within and among all nations and peoples'. Put simply, it aims to build a more peaceful world for everyone who lives in it. Peace affects almost every aspect of our lives. Each year, the United Nations chooses a different theme for this special day, for example 'End racism: build peace' or 'Climate action for peace'. This helps us to see that true peace can only be achieved when all people are treated equally, or that we must combat the climate emergency, which threatens all of our lives.  
International Day of Peace events
As well as taking part in a one-minute silence at midday (local time), people in cities, towns and villages worldwide can get involved in many different events on this special day. This could be in the field of the arts, with photography, film, music or dance. It could be sports activities such as a football match for peace. Or it could be yoga, meditation and prayer. Children and teenagers also take part in a wide range of activities related to peace and unity, often focusing on preventing school violence and bullying. 
International Day of Peace online
With the internet and social media, there is a lot more awareness of International Peace Day than back in 1981. Social media posts sharing information, ideas and peace messages reach millions of people all over the globe. There are many online events which people can register for on the day, such as live shows, conferences and workshops.
What we can all do for peace
The International Day of Peace isn't just about ending international conflicts. It is also about changing our behaviour towards each other and our environment. For example, we can try to bring peace to our personal lives by saying sorry and making peace with someone we know. Individual actions add up to great things when they are multiplied by millions of people all over the planet, and we can all contribute to making the world a more peaceful place.

What exactly is mindfulness?
When we are mindful, we are more conscious of our thoughts, our actions and what is happening around us. We might notice a beautiful sunset or really listen carefully to what a friend is saying, rather than planning what we’re going to say next. We are also more aware of our own feelings and our thoughts. Jon Kabat Zinn, who has done a lot to make mindfulness popular, says mindfulness is: ‘Paying attention, on purpose, in the present moment, and without judging.’
So we are consciously deciding what to pay attention to, we are not worrying about the past or planning for the future and we are not trying to control or stop our thoughts or feelings – we’re just noticing them.
Why is mindfulness so popular now?
For most people life is getting busier and busier. Technology means that we always have something to do and there isn’t much opportunity to just ‘be’. People are often doing two or three things at the same time: texting while watching TV, or even looking at their phone while walking along the pavement. People are working longer hours and bringing work home. All this can make us stressed, and mindfulness can be a way of reducing this stress.
What are the benefits of mindfulness?
Research shows that mindfulness reduces stress and depression. It can help you to concentrate, have a better memory and to think more clearly. It can also help people to manage pain better and to improve their sleep, and it can even help you lose weight because you won’t eat that whole packet of biscuits without thinking!
How to become more mindful
Mindfulness Day is celebrated on 12 September, so maybe that would be a good day to try a few mindfulness techniques and see if they make a difference. But, of course, you can try these on any day of the year.
A very simple technique that you could try right now is to close your eyes for a couple of minutes and count how many sounds you can hear. This will help to focus you on what is happening right now.
Another technique is to focus on a piece of food, typically a raisin. Instead of eating it without thinking, slow down. Look carefully at it and notice how it feels in your fingers. Smell it. Then put it on your tongue and taste it. Only then start to eat it slowly, noticing how it feels and how it tastes.
Both of these techniques force you to slow down and focus on the present moment, and there are plenty of other ideas you can find online if you want to try mindfulness for yourself. 

Have you ever travelled to a country with a language that you don't speak? If so, perhaps you had trouble understanding the most basic things: signs, instructions, documents, packaging. Maybe you felt quite powerless. This is just a simple example that gives us a small idea of how hard life must be for a person who is unable to read. Illiteracy is a major problem around the world. To acknowledge the huge efforts of people working in this field, the United Nations celebrates International Literacy Day every 8 September.
What is UN International Literacy Day?
Since 1967, this annual celebration has brought attention to people in the world who don't know how to read or write. It highlights ways to combat this problem and the huge progress that has been made. Every 8 September, UNESCO holds an awards ceremony in which prizes are given to individuals and organisations who work hard to increase literacy around the world.
How big is the problem?
Although illiteracy levels have fallen significantly in the last 50 years, it is still an important issue. Illiteracy across the globe was at 43 per cent in 1980, while a 2024 report estimated that it had dropped to as little as nine per cent, which is very good news. However, that's still some 739 million young people and adults worldwide who lack basic literacy skills, and in some regions such as sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia, the rates are still above 30 per cent.  
What are the consequences of illiteracy?
There is a strong connection between illiteracy and poverty. People who can read and write have an enormous advantage over those who can't when it comes to studying and training. This means that literate people generally earn more money and even enjoy better health. 
What is the situation for women and girls?
A study by the UN showed that almost 83 per cent of women and girls are able to read and write. However, two-thirds of all illiterate people in the world are female. This problem is due to factors such as insufficient educational opportunities for girls or the tradition in some countries for girls to get married at a young age. Many organisations work to try to empower women and girls by teaching them literacy skills.
What is the situation for men and boys?
The same UN study showed that, internationally, 90 per cent of men and boys are able to read and write. However, in many Western countries, girls generally show better literacy than boys. Experts suggest that this is due to education techniques that don't always suit boys.      
What about digital literacy?
Digital technology is affecting how we live, and how we learn. In the digital era, learning to read and write has become more accessible, and much of the reading we do is on devices such as computers and smartphones. Digital literacy – knowing how to find, understand and use information online – is now seen as an essential extension of basic literacy. UNESCO emphasises digital literacy as a central part of International Literacy Day. However, it also highlights that there is a 'digital divide'. Today, 2.6 billion people – 32 per cent of the global population – still lack internet access, with 1.8 billion of them living in rural areas. By supporting projects around the world that work towards reducing the digital divide, organisations like UNESCO aim to give more people equal opportunities to work and learn.   
How can I participate?
Many libraries, schools and universities organise events to celebrate International Literacy Day, often inviting famous writers to participate. In recent years, celebrations have also included virtual panels, livestreams and social media campaigns that allow people to take part from anywhere in the world.
Since 1994 the UN has celebrated the International Day of the World's Indigenous Peoples on 9 August with special events, conferences and meetings around the world.
Who are the indigenous peoples of the world?
Indigenous people are the first people to live in a particular place – the original population that first created a community on that land before other people came to live in, conquer or colonise the area. People self-identify as indigenous. That means they decide for themselves whether they consider themselves to be indigenous. 
There are more than 350 million indigenous people living in 90 countries. They represent 5,000 different cultures and speak the great majority of the thousands of languages that are spoken around the world today. Indigenous communities often have distinct beliefs, culture and customs. Many indigenous people still live in very close contact with the land, with a respect for and understanding of their natural surroundings. 
What challenges do they face?
Indigenous peoples are not the dominant groups in the societies they live in. The dominant groups are the people that arrived later. This means that indigenous peoples have suffered from many problems related to a lack of economic power, social protection and political representation.
Although indigenous people make up less than five per cent of the world's total population, they represent 15 per cent of the world's poorest people. They are more likely to have limited access to healthcare and education, and members of indigenous communities live shorter lives than non-indigenous groups. Their languages are not normally taught in schools, and many of these languages are in danger of disappearing. It is estimated that one indigenous language is lost every two weeks. 
Many indigenous peoples do not have control over their land. Governments and companies take their land to cut down trees, to farm cows or for other activities that use these natural resources and damage the environment. This often forces indigenous people to leave their land, losing their ancestral homes and their source of wealth and food.
What has been done?
Recently, in New Zealand, one of the local Maori tribes won a legal battle to protect the river that runs through their land. The new law protects the river as if it were a person, a Maori ancestor or a member of the tribe. Another historic legal battle was won by the Waorani people of Ecuador, when they successfully stopped 500,000 acres of Amazonian rainforest from being mined by oil companies.
Making sure indigenous peoples have legal rights over their land and resources is a matter of human rights. It also brings environmental benefits to the planet. Deforestation rates in Bolivia, Brazil and Colombia were two to three times lower in forests officially belonging to indigenous communities. 
Progress made by indigenous communities is supported by the 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, a document that has been agreed on by 148 countries. Importantly, the declaration defends indigenous peoples' right to make decisions about the use and protection of their ancestral land. It also sets out many rights, including indigenous peoples' rights to education and healthcare, participation in political and legal processes and the protection of indigenous languages. 
What more needs to be done? 
Despite the progress made, indigenous communities still legally own only a very small percentage of their land globally. The UN document is an important step, but more countries need to commit to it, and the countries that have signed need to do what they have promised. All around the world, indigenous people are fighting for their rights, as well as protesting against deforestation and climate change. Part of the movement to support them is the celebration of the International Day of the World's Indigenous Peoples on 9 August. Why not join in?
